## Introduction to RISC-V 

### Learning objectives

* Components in a computer system

* Software/hardware Layers in a computer system

* Registers in RISC-V

* Use ADD/SUB instrutions to compute on registers 

### Key Concepts

Keywords: abstraction, instruction, instruction set architecture (ISA), register, register
file,  operand, source operands/registers, destination register 

## Computer and Abstraction

Computer architecture is about designing computer systems. 

### Hardware Components 

The hardware components include:

* Input/output. Screen, keyboard, mouse, etc.

* Storage. Hard disk, CD/DVD, USB flash drive.

* Communications. Network adapter.

* Motherboard. 

* Processor.

* Memory.

* Other controllers and interface chips.  

### Software Components 

Applications. Operating system (OS) manages hard resources and applications.

### Programs

An instruction is a basic operaton that can be performed by processors.

Processors execute machine code, the binary representation of instructions. 

We can code in assembly languages, using the textual representation of
instructions. An assembler converts assemly language code to machine code.

Code written in high level languages is converted into machine code by the compiler. 

For example, in a high level language, we perform addition like

```
i = i + j
```

The compiler converts the statement to an instruction.

```
add    x10, x10, x11
```

The assembler converts the instuction to machine code, which
is instrcution encoded with bits.

```
00000000101101010000010100110011
```

The machin code is stored in memory. The processor fetches
intructions from memory and execute them (do the operations
specified by the instructions). 

## RISC-V ISA

Instruction set architecture (ISA) specifies the instruction set a processor supports.

### Register

Data are stored in registers or in memory.  

A register is a hardware structure that can store values. It is like a hardware-supported variable.

A register file is a collection of registers for general purpose computing.
RISC-V has 32 registers in the registe file. They are numbered from 0 to 31.
`x0` is register 0 , `x1` is register 1, and so on.

Register 0 is always 0. It cannot hold other values.  

Each register also has a name.  We can use register number or name in programs.
For example, both `x0` and `zero` refer to register 0, and both `x1` and `ra`
refer to register 1.

### ADD/SUB

Processors operate on values in registers, with instructions. ADD/SUB
instructions do additon/subtraciton. They need three registers: rs1, rs2, and
rd. rs1 and rs2 are source operands and rd is the destination, where the
result is saved.

```
    add     x1, x2, x3      # x1 = x2 + x3
    sub     x1, x2, x3      # x1 = x2 - x3
```
