## Control-flow

### Learning objectives

* Use instructions like ADDI that take an immediate as an operand

* Write if-else structure with control flow insructions (BEQ/BNE/BLT/BGE)

* Write loops with control flow insructions (BEQ/BNE/BLT/BGE)
    - while loop
    - for loop

* Explain the behavior of instruciton sequences 

* Count the number of instructions that are executed by processors

### Key Concepts

Keywords: immediate, branch instruction, instruction execution, loop.

### ADDI

Instruction like ADDI have only one operand from register. The other (the
second) operand is an immediate (a value specifed at the coding time and cannot
be chnaged).

The immediate can be negative.  There is no subi instruction. Why? because we
do not want to include unnessary instructions.

```
    addi    x1, x1, 1       # x1 += 1
    addi    x1, x2, 100     # x1 += 1
    addi    x1, x10, -50    # x1 = x10 - 50 = x10 + (-50)
```

*The immediate must be between -2048 and 2047.* 

### Branch instructions: BEQ/BNE/BLT/BGE

The exeuction of instructions is normally sequential. The branch instructions
can change the flow of instructions so the instruction following the branch
instruction may not be executed next. 

The branch instructions compare two registers. If the specified condition (`==`
for BEQ, `!=` for BNE, `<` for BLT, and `>=` for BGE) is true, the processor
goes to the instruction indicated the label and resumes sequential execution.

```
    bne     x1, x0, L1      # if x1 != x0 goto label L1
    ...

L1:                         # a label
    add     x2, x1, x1
```

### Use branch instructions
With branch instructions, we can write IF-ELSE and loops. 

#### IF-ELSE

With branch instructions, we can construct if-else structure. 

```
    IF (cond) THEN
        instructions in if branch
    ELSE
        instructions in else branch
```

```
             IF (NOT cond) GOTO label-else
             instructions in if branch
             GOTO  label-end
label-else:
             instructions in else branch
label-end:
```

#### While loop

There are two ways to contstruct while loop. 

```
    While (cond)
        instructions in while loop
```

Method 1:
```
loop:
        IF (NOT cond) GOTO exit
        instructions in while loop
	GOTO loop
exit:
```

Method 2:
```
        GOTO cond-test
loop:
        instructions in while loop
cond-test:
	IF (cond) GOTO loop
exit:
```

#### For loop

We can change for loop to while loop first and then write while loop with RISC-V instructions. 

### Exercises

* Implemente the following loop with RISC-V instructions. 

```C
    int s = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < 100; i += 1)
        s += i;
```

* Implemente the following loop with RISC-V instructions. Can you figure out
  what the loop does? Does the loop ever end?  

```C
    int v = 1;
    int c = 0;

    while (v) {
        v = v + v;
	c = c + 1;
    }
```

### Links

[Here is an overview of common control flow strucutres](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control_flow)

