## Numbers

### Learning objectives

* Read numbers in different formats: decimal numbers, binary numbers,
  2's complement numbers, and hexadecimal numbers.

* Convert numbers from one format to another

* Addition/subtraction of binary numbers, 2's complement numbers, and hexadecimal numbers. 

* Negate a 2's complement numbers 

* Extend bits to more bits. Sign extension vs zero extension.

* ASCII 

* Bits can be interpreted in many different ways.

### Key Concepts

Keywords: unsigned binary numbers, 2's complement numbers, hexadecimal numbers, ASCII, 
sign extension, addition, subtraction. 

### Binary numbers

Computers only deal with bits. Numbers are stored as bits. Therefore, it is important
to understand binary numbers, 2's complement numbers, and hexadecimal numbers. 

#### Binary to decimal

In a binary number, bits represent different values. We can find out the value
each bit denotes, and then add the values together to get the total value in decimal
(because we do calculations in decimal).

Example: 

```
The binary number is: 1101

To find out its decimal representation: 

1 * 8 + 1 * 4 + 0 * 2 + 1 * 1 = 13
```

### Two's complement numbers

Most computers use 2's complement number system to represent negative numbers. 

When we talk about 2's complement numbers, we need to know the number of bits
we are dealing with, for example, 8 bits, 12 bits, or 32 bits.

The left most bit is the sign bit. 1 indicates a negative value, and 0 a
non-negative value.  

```
Bits: 1001
As unsigned binary number: the decimal representation is 9
As 4-bit 2's complement number: the decimal representation is -8 + 0 + 0 + 1 = -7 
            Or 9 - 16 = -7
```

#### Negation of 2's complement numbers

Given the bits for x, we flip all the bits and add 1 to get the bits for -x.
For example, we can negate 7 (0b0111) with the following steps.

```
Flip all the bits:   1000
Add one:             1001
```

It works because we essentially do -x = 0 - x = (-1 + 1) - x = (-1 - x) + 1.

#### Sign extension 

Very often, we need to do extension on bits, i.e., use more bits to represent 
the same value. For example, we load a byte from memory, which has 8 bits, but
need to save them into a 32-bit register. We need to extend the 8 bits to 32 bits.

If the bits are treated as 2's complement number, we need to do sign extension to 
preserve the value: duplicate the sign bit. 

For unsigned binary nubmers, we just do zero extension: add more 0's.

The following are examples of extending 4-bit to 8-bit numbers. 

```
1010 
Sign extension: 1111 1010  The sign bit is dupcliated
0    extension: 0000 1010  Four 0's are prepended

0100 ==> 0000 0100
Sign extension: 0000 0100  The sign bit is dupcliated
0    extension: 0000 0100  Four 0's are prepended
```

### Hexadecimal numbers

Hexadecimal numbers can be converted to/from binary numbers easily. 
They are much shorter than binary representations.

### ASCII

We can use bits to indicate characters. Basically, we assign
a number to each character. ASCII is a widely used standard.  
For example, the number 48 indicates charater `0`. 

[ASCII on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ASCII).

