## Logical and bitwise operations

### Learning objectives

* Compare unsigned numbers

* Use bitwise and logical instructions: AND, OR, XOR, and shift

* Load any 32-bit immediate in register

* Logical operators (`&&` and `||`) in high-level languages

### Compare unsigned numbers

When comparing two registers, the result depends on how we interpret the bits.
We may get different results if we treat them as unsigned numbers or as 2's
complement numbers. 
 
### Shift instruction

Shift the bits in a register to left or right. 

Pay attention to the diffrence betwwn SRLI and SRAI. SRLI shifts 0 in from the
left end and SRAI shifts in the sign. 

### AND, OR, XOR, ANDI, ORI, XORI

There are just bitwise logical operations.

The immediate is sign extedned from 12 bits to 32 bits.

There is no NOT instruction. The operaton is done with `XOR` instruction. 

### Load any 32-bit constant into a register

`LUI` and `ADDI` can load any 32-bit constant in a register.
`LUI` sets the upper 20 bits, and `ADDI` sets the lower 12 bits.
Note that the immeidate in `ADDI` is sign extended. So we may
have to adjust the immediate in `LUI`.

### Logical operation in high-level languages

`&&` and `||` in many high-level languages, e.g., C, are short-circuit
evaluated. For example, if `cond1` in `(cond1 && cond2)` is false, `cond2` is
not evaluated because even if it is true, the result of `&&` is false.  

We assume short-circuit evaluation, too, in this course.  In the following
example, if `s1 < s2` is not true, `s3` and `s4` are not compared. 

```
Pseudocode:
IF (s1 < s2 && s3 < s4) THEN 
    instructions in if branch

RISC-V instructions:
	bge	s1, s2, L_afterif     # if cond1 is false, do not execute if branch
	bge	s3, s4, L_afterif     # if cond2 is false, do not execute if branch
	instructions in if branch
L_afterif:
```

Here is a link to [short-circuit evaluation on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short-circuit_evaluation).
