## Memory

### Learning objectives

* Describe memory model.

* Use RISC-V instructions to access data items in memory.

* Calculate the offset and address of array elements.

* Describe the load/store operations on different data types (bytes, half words, words).

* Decribe how strings are stored in memory.

#### Keywords

Memory, load/store instructions, address, addressing mode, offset/displacement,
array, string, endianness, big endian, little endian, alignment, KiB, MiB, GiB

### Reading

Reading: Section 2.3.

### Memory model

Memory is a byte stream or a byte array.

Each byte is numbered. THe number is the address of the bytes.

With 32-bit address, the supported memory size is 4GB. 

If a data item, e.g., has more than one byte, its address 
is the lowest byte address.

### Load/store instructions

RISC-V supports bytes, half-words, and words in RV32I.

We need to specify an address in load/store instructions. 

The addressing mode is an address in a regiter plus an offset.

Example:
```
	lw	t0, 0(s1)	# load a word from the address in s1, into t0
	sw	t1, 4(s1)	# save t1 to address computed by adding s1 and 4
```

#### Accesing words in program  

We can use `la` pseudoinstruction to load the address of a variable into a
register.  For example, `la t0, Var` loads the address of Var into register t0.
In RISC-V programs, Var is just a label. Then we can use `t0` as the base
register in load/store instructions.

```
	.data

Var:	.word	10

	.code

	# la	t0, Var		# load address indicated by the label to t0
	lw	t1, 0(t0)	# read from the address

	# more instructions

	sw	t1, 0(t0)	# write to the address
```

#### Array

Suppose a word array A is located at address 1000. `a[0]` is located
at at 1000, `A[1]` is at 1004, `a[2]` is at 1008, and so on. Given 
an index, the address of `A[i]` is the address of A plus `4*i`. In
program, we use shift operation to compute `4*i`.

### Data types supported in RV32I 

The core of RISC-V supports bytes, half-bytes (16-bit), and words (32-bit). The
instructions are listed below. The addressing mode is the same for all
load/store instructions, as shown in the LW and SW examples.

```
Bytes: 		    LB, LBU, SB
Half-words: 	LH, LHU, SH
Words:		    LW, SW
```

If a byte or a half-word is loaded from memory, the bits are extended to 32
bits, because a register has 32 bits. `LB` and `LH` do sign extension.
`LBU` and `LHU` do 0 extension.

SB stores the lowest byte (the right-most byte) to memory. SH stores the lowest
half word (the two right-most bytes) to memory. 

#### Strings

We assume ASCII strings in this course. An ASCII string is stored in a byte
array. Each charater takes one byte. A null charcter (a byte of value 0) marks
the end of a string.  The byte array should be large enough to store all the
characters, including the null character.

### Alignment of address

If a word address is aligned, it is a multiple of 4 because a word
has 4 bytes. 

If a half-word address is aligned, it is a multiple of 2 because a half-word
has 2 bytes. 

RISC-V does not require data addresses to be aligned, but misaligned
address leads to poor performance.

### Endianness

Endianness specifies the order of bytes when multiple bytes are 
stored in memory. RISC-V uses little-endian so the lower byte in
a word is stored in lower address.  For example, if `0x11223344`
is stored in memory address 100, `0x44` is at address 100, 
`0x33` is at address 101, and so on.

### Exercises

1.  How many bytes are in 1 Kib? 

2.  Assume the word array `A` is located at address 0x10010000. Write RSIC-V assembly
    code to for the following operations:

        A[4] = A[0] + A[3]
        A[20] = 4

3.  How many bytes do we need to store string "memory"? What is its length? If
    the string is located at 0x10010000, what is the address of character `r`? 

4.  Assume we have two byte arrays `s` and `d`, whose addresses are in `s1` and
    `s2`, respectively. A string is stroed in `s`. Write RISC-V assembly code
    to copy the string to `d`.

5.  Which of the followng addresses are aligned word addresses? 

        0x10020004
        0x10020006
        0x1002A0CC
        0x1001000D
        0x100C000E
