## Encoding 1

### Learning objectives

Encoding of RISC-V instructions.

* RISC-V encoding format

* Encoding instructions with R, I, S and U types of format

* Decoding instructions

#### Keywords

Instruction encoding, machine code, encoding format, fields in machine code.

### Encoding instruction

Instructions are represented and stored in memory as bits.

RV32I encodes each instruction as a word. Machine code is encoded instruction.
Typically, we use 8 hexadecimal digits to denote the bits because the
representation is shorter that 32 bits.

RISC-V has 6 types of instruction format: R, I, S, SB, U, UJ.  The formats and
fields in each format are illusrated on [this
page](https://github.com/zhijieshi/cse3666/blob/master/risc-v/rv-encoding.md).

### R-type format

R-type format is for instructions that have 3 registers. 
It has fields for `rs1`, `rs2`, and `rd`. Other bits 
specify the operation. 

Example: encode the following instruction `add x1, x2, x3`.

We figure out each field.

```
# opcode, funct3, funct7 are from reference card/manual
opcode:	0110011	
rd    : 00001		# register x1
funct3: 000             
rs1   : 00010		# register x2
rs2   : 00011		# register x3
funct7:	000 0000	

Put all bits together to get the 32 bits: 

0000000 00011 00010 000 00001 0110011

The hexadecimal representation is:

0x003100B3
```

### I-type format

I-type is for instruction with immeidate, for example, ADDI, 
ANDI, SLLI, and LW.

There is no `rs2` in these instructions. So bits in `rs2`, 
and bits in `funct7`, are used to encode the immediate. 
In total, 12 bits are in the `imm` field.

### S-type format

S-type is for store instructions. These instructions
have two source registers, but do not have `rd`.
The 12-bit immediate is placed in `funct7` and `rd`.
`funct7` stores the higher 7 bits and `rd` stores the
lower 5 bits.

### U-type format

U-type is for instructions that need more bits for 
immediate, for example, LUI. The fields are
20-bit immediate, 5-bit rd, and 7-bit opcode.   
