## Function 

### Learning objectives

RISC-V support for functions. Write and call functions in RISC-V assembly language.

* Memory layout of an applicaiton

* Instrucitons for function call and return

* Calling convention

* Using stack 

#### Reading

Section 2.8

#### Keywords

Function, procedure, leave function/procedure, caller, callee, calling convension, stack, local storage.

### Memory layout

The memory space of an applicaton is divided into different sections.

```
Higher end:             Reserved
                        Stack  for stack
                        Free
                        Free
                        Heap   for dynamic data
                        Data   for global and static data
                        Text   for instructions
Low end:                Reserved
```

Stack is located at the higher end of the memory, and grows towards lower
addresses.

Register `sp` is the address of the word at the top of the stack (the lowest
address).

### Function call and return

A function A calls a function B. A is the caller and B is the callee. In recursion, 
a function calls itself.

If a function does not call another funciton, it is a leave function/procedure.

JAL jumps to a label and save PC+4 in a register, which can be used as the
return address. Here PC is the address of the JAL instruction.

JALR jumps to the address, the sum of a register and an offset, and save PC+4 in a register. 
JALR can be used for returning from a function, where the address is in a register.

We use `ra` as the destination register in JAL or JALR in function calls. 

If PC+4 is not needed in JAL and JALR, use `x0` as the destination register.

Here is an example of funciton call and return.

```
    # code in a function, e.g., main
    jal     ra, foo         # call foo

    # continue after foo returns
    add     a1, s1, s2      # what is in ra?   

    # code for foo. an empty function at the moment
foo:
    jal     x0, ra, 0       # return: go to the address in ra
```

### Calling convention

The first 8 arguments are passed to function in argument registers `a0`, `a1`, and so on.

The return value(s) are placed in `a0` and `a1`. 

In general, the callee does not need to save temporary regiters (like `t0`) and
argument registers (like `a0`). The callee needs to save other registers.

Note that JAL changes register `ra` (or the register specified in the instruction).

### Using stack

During a function call, storage for saveing registers and for local variables
is allocated on the stack. 

Two basic operations on a stack is push and pop. Recall that the stack grows
towards lower address. Here are the RISC-V instructions performing push and pop.

```
# push ra onto the stack
        addi    sp, sp, -4
        sw      ra, 0(sp)

# pop one word from the stack and save the popped value in ra 
        lw      ra, 0(sp)
        addi    sp, sp, 4
```

Often, we need to push and pop multiple data items. We only need to adjust `sp`
once.

```
# push ra, s1, and s2 onto the stack
        addi    sp, sp, -12
        sw      ra, 8(sp)
        sw      s1, 4(sp)
        sw      s2, 0(sp)

# restore ra, s1, and s2 from the stack
        lw      ra, 8(sp)
        lw      s1, 4(sp)
        lw      s2, 0(sp)
        addi    sp, sp, 12
```

#### Local storage

Storage for local variables is allocated on stack. For example, we can move
`sp` down to get storage for two words. It can be used for two variables, each
taking one word. Or it can be used for one array of two words.  

### Exercises

*   Implement a function that returns the largest of three integers. 

*   Translate the following C code to RISC-V assembly code. 

```C
    m = max3(10, 20, -20);
```

*   Translate the following C function to RISC-V assembly code.

```C
int   foo()
{
    int  i;

    for (i = 0; i < 10; i ++)
         bar(i);

}
```
