## Encoding 2

### Learning objectives

* Encoding branches

* Encoding jumps

* Decoding the instructions

#### Keywords

Instruction encoding, SB-format, UJ-format, PC-relative addressing, placement of bits. 

### Encoding branch

The target address of a branch is of 32-bit, which cannot be placed in an
instruction word. Instead, we use only 12 bits to represent the distance betwen
the target and the current instructions.

```
Branch offset = Target address - PC 
```

Branch offset is always even, i.e., the least significant bit (LSB) is always 0.
We do not need to keep it in the machine code. 

The 12 bits to be kept in the machine code are bits 13 to 1. Other bits in 
the offset (bits 31 to 14) must be the same as the sign (bit 13).

Branch is encoded with SB format, which is similar to S format. However, the
bits in immediate are placed differently in the funct7 and rd fields.

Branch has limit on how far it can branch to. 

### Encoding JAL

JAL is encoded in UJ-type format, a format similar to U-type. 20 bits are
available to encode the offset. Therefore, JALR can go further than branches. 

The difference between JAL and other U-type instructions are the placement of
bits in the immediate. 

### Encoding JALR

JALR is encoded in I-type format. 

JALR can go to any address stored in a register.

LUI and JALR can go to any address in the 32-bit memory space. 

### Immediate

Fields are located at the same location for all types of format. 

The complicated step is to reconstruct the immediate, which 
is done differently for I, S, U, SB, and UJ types. The placement
of immediate bits in instruction word is for simpler hardware
implementaton. 

