## Sequential circuit

### Learning objectives

* Clock

* D flip-flop and register 

* Register file

* State machine and the components in a state machine

* Memory

* Timing requirements

#### Keywords

Clock, clock rate, clock cycle time, 
D flip-flop, register, register file, state machine, 
delay, propogation delly, set up time, hold time

### Sequential circuit

The output of a sequential circuit depends the current input
AND a summary of *previous input*. Therefore, we need clock
and *memory elements* that can remember the past.

### D flip-flop, Register, and Register File

A simple bistable element can remember 1 bit. 

Based on bistable elements, we can build many kinds of memory units.
D Flip-flop is a commonly used module.

A postive edge triggered D flip-flop stores the data input (a bit) at the
rising edge (positive edge), when clock changes from 0 to 1.  Note that it only
'checks' the input at the rising edge.  The bit stored in a D flip-flop is
stable for the rest of the clock cycle even if the input bit changes during the
cycle.

A register stores bits. For simplicity, we assume registers are implemented
with D flip-flops.

A register file consists of a colleciton of registers. 

The register file in RISC-V has two read ports and one write port.

### State machine

A state machine keeps the summary of previous input, called state, in *memory
elements*,  for example, D flip-flops. A state machine is synchronous. There is
a clock and all bits in state are updated at the same time.

There two combinational components in a state machine. One generates output 
of the machine and the other generates the state for the next cycle. Both
take as input the current state and the current input to the state machine. 

We take a 16-bit accumulator as an example.

#### Timing requirements

In a cycle, a state machine goes through the following phases:

* Update state. New state is stored in registers.

* Computing. Combinational circuit generates output and new state.

* New state is presented to registers to meet the set up time requirements. 

The cycle time of a state machine must be long enough so the output and new
state can be generated early enough.

### Memory

The (main) memory module in computer is for storing large amounts of data.
Compared to register file, memory is cheaper (per bit) and slower. 

The input to a memory module includes the following.

* Address 
* Write data, to be writtent to the address during write operation
* MemWrite, asserted to enable write
* MemRead, asserted to enable read
* Read data. Data read from the address during read operation 

