## Floating Point Numbers

### Learning objectives

* Representation of real numbers with bits.

* IEEE 754 standard for floating-point numbers (single precision and double precision).

* RISC-V support for floating-point numbers.

* RISC-V calling convention for floating-point numbers. 

* The limitations of floating-point numbers.

#### Keywords

floating-point numbers, sigle precision, double precision, excess representation, RISC-V F extension, 
RISC-V D extension.

### Binary numbers with fraction

The bits represent fraction are placed after the binary point. For example, in
0b101.0111, 0111, the four bits after the point, are the fractional part. 

Bits to the right of the binary point carries values less than one.  A bit
carries half of the value of its left neighbor. 

To find out the value of a binary fraction, we just add up the value each bit
denotes.  For example, we can find out the value of 0b101.0111 in decimal as
follows.

1 ✕ 2<sup>2</sup> + 
0 ✕ 2<sup>1</sup> + 
1 ✕ 2<sup>0</sup> + 
0 ✕ 2<sup>-1</sup> + 
1 ✕ 2<sup>-2</sup> + 
1 ✕ 2<sup>-3</sup> + 
1 ✕ 2<sup>-4</sup> 
= 5.4375

### Representation of real numbers with bits

Convert a real number (in decimal) to binary.

### Normalized representation

Normalized representaton has only one non-zero digit to the left of the point.
For example, 5.42 ✕ 10<sup>-9</sup> is a normalized decimal number.

For binary numbers, the normalized representation has the following form.

± 1.fraction ✕ 2<sup>exponent</sup>

Fraction consists of bits. Its value is in [0, 1).

Note that although the fraction is in binary, the exponent is in decimal. 

Here are a few examples:

0b1.101001 ✕ 2<sup>20</sup>

0b1.111 ✕ 2<sup>-4</sup>

### IEEE 754 Standard

IEEE 754 Standard specifies how to represent real numbers with certain numbers of bits.
Single-precision numbers use 32 bits, and double-precision numbers use 64 bits.

Given a normalized binary representation, 

± 1.fraction ✕ 2<sup>exponent</sup>

we would like to encode the essential information, sign, fraction, and exponent.

The basic idea is to divide the bits into three fileds, sign, exponent, and fraction.
The number of bits in the fields is listed in the following table.

<table>
<tr><th>&nbsp</th><th>Single precision</th><th>Double precision</th></tr>
<tr><td>Total number of bits</td><td>32</td><td>64</td></tr>
<tr><td>Sign</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr>
<tr><td>Number of bits in exponent</td><td>8</td><td>11</td></tr>
<tr><td>Number of bits in fraction</td><td>23</td><td>52</td></tr>
<tr><td>Bias in exponent encoding</td><td>127</td><td>1023</td></tr>
</table>

Encoding sign and fraction is straitforward. The exponent, however, 
is in excess representation.

#### Excess representation 

Excess representation adds a bias to the value to get the encoded.
For the exponent in single-precision floating-point numbers, the bias is 127.

To encode exponent -10, we calculate

-10 + 127 = 117.

Then we place 117 in the exponent field. In the end, the eight bits in the exponent
fileds are 0b01110101.

We reverse the steps when reading the bits in the exponent field.

#### Denormalized numbers

The standard also includes denormalized numbers that are smaller than normal numbers.
The hidden bit in denormalized numbers are 0. 

### RISC-V Support for Floating-Point Numbers

RISC-V F extension supports single-precision floatng point numbers.

RISC-V D extension supports double-precision floatng point numbers.
D extension is a superset of F extension.

There are 32 floating-point registers: `f0`, `f1`, ..., `f32`.
`f0` is not sepcial. It can keep non-zero values.

In D extension, a register, for example, `f0` or `f11`, can hold either a
single precision or a double precision number.

The instructions in RISC-V F and D extensions include:

```
# load and store
flw, fsw, fld, fsd

# arithmetic
fadd.s, fsub.s, fmul.s, fdiv.s, fsqrt.s
fadd.d, fsub.d, fmul.d, fdiv.d, fsqrt.d

# comparison. result is saved in integer registers
f.eq.s, f.lt.s, f.le.s
f.eq.d, f.lt.d, f.le.d
```

The floating-point arguments are passed to functions in register `fa0`, `fa1`,
..., `fa7`. The register numbers are `f10`, `f11`, ..., `f17`, respectively.
The return values are in `fa0` and `fa1`.

