## Computer Performance

### Learning objectives

* Measure, calculate, and compare computer performance

#### Keywords

CPU time, instruction count, CPI, clock cycle, clock cycle time, speedup, Amdahle's law.

#### Math background

We need some math skills. [Here is a quick review](https://zhijieshi.github.io/cse3666/math/).

### CPU Time

CPU execution time, also CPU time or execution time, is a reliable metric to compare computer/processor performance. 

Two important equations are:

CPU Time = Clock Cycles &times; Clock Cycle Time

Clock Cycles = Instruction Count &times; CPI

Combining the two equations, we have the classic equation in computer architecture:

CPU Time = Instruction Count &times; CPI &times; Clock Cycle Time

#### CPI

CPI is cycles per instruction. Instructions take different number of cycles to execute. 
The average CPI of a program is:

```
         Total Clock Cycles
CPI = ----------------------------
        Total Instruction Count
```

### Speedup

Speedup is the ratio of two CPU Times. Suppose we have made a change to a computer 
system and would like to evaluate the change. We compute the speedup. If speedup 
is greater than 1, the change result in better performance. 

```
            CPU Time Before
speedup = --------------------
            CPU Time New
```

### Amdahle's law

Amdahle's law says the performance improvement to be gained from 
using some faster mode of execution is limited by the fraction of 
the time the faster mode can be used.

Optimization on part of the system does not lead to similar overall
speedup. 
