## Introduction to cache

### Learning objectives

* Three quesitons on cache:  what, why, and how

* How bits in a memory address are used when accessing cache 

* Questions on direct-mapped cache 

    * Where is a block placed in cache?
    * How does cache check if a data item is in cache? 
    * How does cache replace/evict a block?

#### Keywords

Cache, hit, miss, block, block address, block offset, cache index, tag,
replacement, evict.

### Cache

We need a memory hierarchy to deal with the performance gap between
processor and memory. Cache (in this course) is hardware component
that serves data to processor core faster. 

Cache consists of blocks of data. When a data item (e.g., a byte)  is loaded
into cache, the entire block is loaded. 

We can consider the memory space is divided into blocks. To find a data item,
we find the block first, using block address, then find the data itme within
the block, using block offset.

When a block is loaded into a direct-mapped cache, it has only one location 
to stay. The mapping is done by the following:

    Cache index = Block address **mod** The number of blocks in cache

Each cache block is associated with a tag. Because many blocks are mapped to each
cache block. The tag helps to identify which block is in cache.

When a request is received, the cache controller do the following:

*   Extracts tag, cache index, and block offset from the address
*   Use the cache index to locate a cache block and associated valid bit and tag
*   If the cache block is valid and the tag associated with the block 
    matches the tag from the address, it is a hit. Use block offset to select 
    a data item.
*   If it is a cache miss, the cache loads the correct block from memory and
    replaces the existing block at the location specified by the cache index.
    Tag and valid bit are also updated. Redo the cache looup. 
